the greatest hindrance to living is
expectancy
which depends upon the moral and wastes
today
seneca when we procrastinate
we are immersed in future thinking and
unable to do the work that we had
planned to do in the present
moment the consequences of this behavior
are often harmful
for example if we refrain from
performing necessary tasks
this will negatively influence future
results
and the acquirement of resources while
utilizing the resources we have
accumulated
by past endeavors we stagnate
and with stagnation comes deterioration
but most ironic is that the act of
repeated procrastination
probably costs us more energy than
performing the task
itself this video will explore the
mechanisms of procrastination
what is it where does it come from what
do different philosophies say about it
that might help us out
[Music]
let's start with the nature of
procrastination
procrastination means that we delay or
postpone
things this happens because of various
reasons
sometimes it's inevitable because
something more important happens or
outside circumstances
seriously impede our ability to act
when this happens we either choose to
procrastinate
with a very good reason that is often
moral or ethical or
associated with health our circumstances
simply make it impossible for us to
perform our tasks
so these are the legit reasons why we
procrastinate
however the majority of procrastination
is done
without legit reasons or more
specifically
petty reasons that we have rationally
transformed
into legit reasons an example of this is
when we tell ourselves that we deserve
a long break in which we choose to play
games
or drink or other stuff that's more fun
than doing our task sure everyone needs
breaks from time to time but when we are
set out to work
according to a reasonable schedule this
so-called
deserved break is probably just an
excuse to not
perform the task in the back of our
minds
we know that these so-called legit
reasons are nothing more than excuses
now why do we procrastinate and where
does it come from
performing a task whether it's writing a
thesis
doing paperwork going for a run or
lifting weights
generally takes effort however this
assertion can be disputed
especially within taoist philosophy
which i'll talk about later on in this
video
the main reason in this case is that we
associate
tasks with effort and the need for
energy focus
and dedication and that we link these
factors to boredom
and pain therefore we see these tasks as
unpleasant
and we rather spend our time seeking
immediate gratification which is much
easier to acquire so we exchange the act
of performing tasks for short-term
pleasure which leads to short-term
gratification
at the cost of achieving long-term goals
the problem with
short-term gratification is that shortly
after the high
we experience the inevitable low and
thus
many people seek another form of
short-term gratification
to stay out of that low as long as
possible so they live a life that's
basically a string of short
term pleasures and never get anywhere in
the long term
because they are unwilling to sacrifice
their time and energy without getting
instant gratification
in return when people begin to realize
that they get nothing
done because of repeated procrastination
they'll start wondering
how they can break the cycle to break
the cycle
it's important to know what's the root
of procrastination
the starting point of procrastination is
that we dread to perform a certain task
we've already argued that this dread
comes from an association with
boredom and pain so why are certain
tasks considered
painful there's way more to this than
simply the prospect of expanding energy
in an article published on the website
psychology today
shaham heshmat writes that anxiety and
low self-confidence are common reasons
why we procrastinate
when we're anxious we might infatuate a
challenging task
making it much more difficult in our
minds than it really is
the prospect of performing an almost
impossible task
evokes anxiety and this anxiety can numb
us
to the point that we don't act at all
this anxiety often goes hand in hand
with a lack of confidence which means
that we don't believe
that we're up to this task and therefore
we avoid it so in both cases the root of
procrastination
lies in our thinking about the task and
not so much in the task itself
now what can we learn from philosophy
the philosophers of old
did concern themselves with
procrastination or in simple terms
laziness roman emperor and stoic
philosopher marcus aurelius for example
wrote in his meditations that working is
part of human nature
and so is sleep but the point he makes
is
that nature has not designed us to sleep
all the time
even though laying in a warm comfortable
bath all day can be a very nice
experience
i quote so you were born to feel nice
instead of doing things and experiencing
them don't you see the plants
the birds the ants and spiders and bees
going about their individual tasks
putting the world in order as best they
can
and you're not willing to do your job as
a human being
why aren't you running to do what your
nature demands
but we have to sleep sometime agreed but
nature set a limit on that as it did on
eating and drinking
and you're over the limit you've had
more than enough of that
but not of working there you're still
below your quota end quote
marcus aurelius argued that when we
indulge in lazy behavior we don't
love ourselves enough because if we did
according to his logic
we love our nature too and what it
demands of us
he described the eudaimonic experience a
state of flourishing
in which people wear themselves down
even for getting to wash and eat
when they are fully immersed in their
task i quote do you have
less respect for your own nature than
the engraver does for engraving
the dancer for the dance the miser for
money or the social climber for status
when they're really possessed by what
they do they would rather stop eating
and sleeping
than give up practicing their art and
quote
statesman and stoic floss for seneca
argued that postponement
is the greatest waste of life
postponement
makes us dependent on the future and
instead of seizing the day
and doing what we can in the present
moment we give away these opportunities
to
fortune simply put by postponing we give
away our control
the present is where the future is made
so if we don't act now
and do the things we can we succumb to
the future which is entirely out of
control
i quote why do you delay says he
why are you idle unless you seize the
day
it flees even though you seize it it
will still flee
therefore you must fly with time's
swiftness
in the speed of using it and as from a
torrent
that rushes by and will not always flow
you must
drink quickly end quote thus the saying
pediem seize the day because isn't this
all we have
so it logically makes no sense to
postpone our tasks
when we can do them now and now is the
only moment
we can perform even though previous
suggestions of the stoics are solid
reasons
why we shouldn't procrastinate they
don't seem to provide us with a solution
isn't there something we can do to
reduce the dread of performing
unpleasant tasks especially when we're
insecure about our capabilities
a slightly different but similar
approach is offered to us by the taoists
their secret lies in what they call wu
way
wu way can be translated as non-action
or
effortless action which points to being
in a state of flow
when we're in a state of flow even the
most dreadful tasks
become effortless undertakings to use
the examples given by marcus aurelius
wu way happens when the engraver becomes
the engraving the dancer becomes
the dance and for what it's worth the
climber for status
becomes the climb what characterizes
effortless action
is the total immersion in a certain
activity in which we are free of
ruminations about the past
or worries about the future the only
thing that exists
is the task at hand at that moment
so there's no thinking about the task
nor worrying about the results
and there's also the absence of
hesitations and doubts about our
capabilities
it's just ourselves and the task as
marcus our release described
we even forget to wash and eat now
what can we do to stop procrastinating
based on previous philosophical insights
the main ingredients that we can take
away from the stoics and the taoists
are seizing the moment and effortless
action
how can we reach this ideal and almost
effortless state of
working in which we experience the
immersion in our tasks
the only way to do this is by simply
starting
when we start we'll discover that our
worries
and mental blockages will disappear one
by one
and before we know it time flies and
things get done
however the problem with procrastination
is that we never truly start
when a task seems so big that it's
almost impossible to finalize
we'll never be able to start confidently
on this task
and when we think that we have all the
time in the world there isn't much
incentive to start right now so we have
to deal with the mental blockages
first in order to make a good start
first of all
it's recommended to pick up a stoic
exercise that reminds us of the
impermanence of
life memento mori because if we realize
that our lives are ticking away second
after second
and that we can't do anything when we're
dead we're probably more serious about
finishing our tasks i've made a separate
video about
memento mori if you want to know more
about it
but realizing impermanence and the
importance of a certain task
can paralyze us even more if we deem our
assignment
as too challenging and almost impossible
to do
this means that we should create an
overview and structure
to lay over the task making it
insightful
and workable thus we could harness the
power of compartmentalizing a task
and if necessary to the extreme if the
prospect of one task is too much
then we could subdivide that task into
microtasks
and plan to do just one microtask a
journey of a thousand
miles starts with a single step so
even if we only finish one percent of a
task
we've already managed to achieve more
than when we postpone
paradoxically when we finish one
microtask
we do not only replenish our
self-confidence we most
likely get hungry for more as well
because we got caught up in the joy of
working
by planning discipline and
compartmentalizing big tasks into small
digestible pieces we can protect
ourselves from the misery called
procrastination
step by step and without worrying about
results
or being crushed by the unbearable
weight of an impossible assignment
we just focus on finishing small parts
of the whole
one by one and when today's work is done
we don't fall back into the trap
of unnecessary future projections we
simply plan tomorrow's tasks
and rest as lautzer wrote do your work
then step back the only path to serenity
thank you for watching
[Music]
you